---
title: "Why Do We Have to Learn This Baby Language?"
---

Brian Harvey, Teaching Professor Emeritus, University of California,
Berkeley

I get it. You're a teenager, it's the first day of what was billed as a
serious computer science course, and you're confronted with
drag-and-drop blocks in primary colors. You've seen this before, back
when your age had only one digit, and you played around with
[Scratch](https://scratch.mit.edu/). Been there, done that.

But Snap*!* (Build Your Own Blocks) isn't Scratch. It's a very serious
programming language, in disguise. The reason for the disguise is to
avoid the way most programming courses spend most of their time and
effort: on the details of the *notation* used by whatever programming
language they choose. Here's the classic example: In your "grownup"
programming language you write

some stuff; some more stuff; and yet more stuff**;**

![](images/media/image1.png){width="1.875in" height="0.875in"}These are
three instructions to the computer, with semicolons in between. Now,
what about that red semicolon at the end? If the language is Java, C, or
C++, that semicolon is *required.* If it's Perl, Pascal, or PL/I, that
semicolon is *forbidden.* Not exactly easy to learn. But if, instead,
the code looks like this:

then there's no need to remember punctuation rules. The visual layout of
the code *is* the notation.

And, of course, there's a benefit to following the visual design of
Scratch: Many kids have grown up with Scratch, and so they can---*you*
can---dive right in and use the parts of Snap*!* that *are* like
Scratch, and then learn the new parts.

Snap*!* is an extended reimplementation of Scratch featuring first class
procedures, first class lists, first class sprites with inheritance, and
first class costumes and sounds. (What does "first class" mean? Wait
until page 4.) An earlier version, BYOB, was a modification of the
Scratch 1.4 source code, but the current version is an entirely separate
program, even though its user interface looks like Scratch 1.4 and it
includes almost all of the Scratch 1.4 primitive blocks. BYOB was
originally developed by Jens MÃ¶nig; as of BYOB 3.0, I joined as
co-developer. (The code is still almost all written by Jens; I have
contributed to the design, libraries, and documentation, as well as
online mentoring of Snap*!* users.)

Scratch has been phenomenally successful at introducing young people to
computer programming; part of that success has been the detailed,
thoughtful design of each small piece of the language. In particular,
they decided to *leave out* some features, to avoid confusing young
users. The tl;dr explanation of Snap*!* is that we added those missing
features. Snap*!* was designed to teach computer science courses to
teenagers, while Scratch was designed to pull in younger children. A
design choice may be good for the Scratch target audience, but not for
the Snap*!* target audience, or vice versa. In every case, the Scratch
Team was aware of the possibilities that they decided to omit. And from
the beginning, don't forget, Scratch has had parallel processing, with
multiple scripts and sprites all running at once. This is a significant
Big Idea that isn't so readily usable in "grownup" languages.

**Build Your Own Blocks**

![](images/media/image2.png){width="6.584722222222222in"
height="2.0770833333333334in"}The ability to build custom blocks was the
first goal of BYOB, as reflected in its name. A limited version of this
capability, allowing only command blocks, later became part of Scratch
2.0.

![](images/media/image8.png){width="1.3888888888888888in"
height="3.216666666666667in"}

When you start to make a custom block, you select its palette color, any
of the standard ones or a gray "Other" category, and its shape (command,
reporter, or predicate). Like a variable, the block can belong to one
sprite or be usable by any sprite. After you've made those choices,
Snap*!* opens a *block editor* window, like the scripting area but just
for this one block definition. After you've finished, the definition is
not visible (although you can bring back the block editor, or keep it
open while you debug the block), but the block is now found in the
palette.

This is very different from the Scratch custom block interface. In
Scratch, all custom blocks are found in their own palette category ("My
Blocks"), and the scripts that define the blocks remain visible in the
scripting area. It's not that one of these interfaces is "right" and the
other "wrong," but they do reflect very different ideas about how custom
blocks will be used.

The Scratch design treats a custom block as *unusual,* very different
from a primitive block. Scratch keeps block definitions visible in the
scripting area so that all of your code is visible to you. But this is
practical only if you define a small number of custom blocks. If you
have 40 custom blocks in a project, your scripting area will be
unmanageable.

![](images/media/image10.png){width="2.925in"
height="0.3333333333333333in"}The Snap*!* design tries to make custom
blocks *ordinary,* just like primitive blocks; ideally, once you've
written a block, you can forget it's homemade. You can have as many of
them as you want, without filling up your scripting area. This is
important not just to keep your screen neat, but also to emphasize the
idea of *abstraction,* perhaps the central idea in computer science: You
write programs in an environment full of procedures that let you think
about the things you want to do, rather than about how to implement
them. You can *extend* Snap*!* with a block library, a collection of
blocks for a particular purpose, written in Snap*!* itself. For example,
below the abs block in the picture above are a collection of blocks that
implement the idea of a *sentence:* a text such as "I am the walrus" is
treated as four words, rather than 15 characters. "I am the walrus " is
the same sentence, even though it's a different text string. The library
has about a dozen blocks for tasks such as this one:

Inside that block are some ugly details about looking for space
characters to work out where the last word is in the text. But you don't
have to *read* those ugly details; you want to find the last word of a
text, so you use that block, and it works.

**Recursion.** The ability to name a script by making a block out of it
isn't just important for neatness and code reuse. It enables the block
to use *itself* to solve a smaller subproblem. The classic example is a
fractal tree. Here's the program and the result of running it:

![](images/media/image11.png){width="6.46875in"
height="3.627083333333333in"}(The program draws in all one color, but
the picture is colored here to show you how a tree includes three
smaller trees, drawn by the three recursive invocations: first orange,
then blue, then green.)

**Nested Sprites**

![](images/media/image15.png){width="5.6090277777777775in"
height="1.5569444444444445in"}Snap*!* gives you the ability to make a
collection of sprites that move together. The canonical example is a
skeleton in which each bone is attached to one closer to the spine; the
entire skeleton can rotate together, or a particular bone can rotate
relative to the whole.

![](images/media/image16.png){width="1.5138888888888888in"
height="0.6944444444444444in"}**\
**

**First Class Lists**

A data type is *first class* in a language if it can be used in all the
same ways as any other data type. For example, in Scratch it's easy to
make a list of numbers, but you can't make a list of *lists*; numbers
are first class, but lists aren't. One of the slogans of Snap*!* is
"Everything first class." In Scratch a list is essentially a kind of
variable: It has a name and a value. The only difference is that the
value has sub-values (the items). Scratch provides a red oval for the
list, like the orange one for a variable, but the value it reports isn't
the actual list; it's a *string,* the concatenation of all the items,
separated by spaces. This works because only strings and numbers can be
items in a Scratch list.

![](images/media/image17.png){width="6.006666666666667in"
height="1.0695833333333333in"}Scratch lists combine two capabilities
that are logically separate. The main capability of a list is that it
can add, change, delete, and report items. The second capability is
associating a name with the list, but that should instead be the job of
an ordinary variable. If you want a list with items "Yakko," "Wakko,"
and "Dot," and you want to call the list "Animaniacs," you should be
able to say

![](images/media/image18.png){width="3.275in" height="0.35in"}You can
build a database as a *list of lists:*

![](images/media/image19.png){width="4.493055555555555in"
height="1.1423611111111112in"}You can implement other data structures,
such as a dictionary:

![](images/media/image20.png){width="4.291666666666667in"
height="0.6041666666666666in"}

![](images/media/image21.png){width="0.65625in"
height="0.25in"}![](images/media/image22.png){width="0.6041666666666666in"
height="0.23958333333333334in"}![](images/media/image23.png){width="0.6041666666666666in"
height="0.23958333333333334in"}**First Class Procedures**

![](images/media/image24.png){width="5.465972222222222in"
height="0.59375in"}First class lists are all you need to invent any data
structure. But we'd also like to be able to invent a new *control*
structure---maybe you want repeat while instead of repeat until, for
example. For that we need *procedures* (blocks and scripts) as first
class data. The gray rings above make that possible. A picture is worth
1000 words:

![](images/media/image28.png){width="0.9in" height="0.225in"}On the
left, clicking the unringed 2+3 gives 5.

On the right, putting 2+3 in a ring gives ***the block itself.***

The reason to create a ringed procedure is that later you'll want to
call it:

![](images/media/image29.png){width="6.452083333333333in"
height="2.5756944444444443in"}![](images/media/image35.png){width="4.134722222222222in"
height="0.3020833333333333in"}Users can create their own control
structures, e.g., abstracting a repeated call of a function for each
item of a list:

When reading the map example, did you understand right away that each
list item is plugged into

![](images/media/image39.png){width="0.8416666666666667in"
height="0.225in"}the empty slot in the block? Elementary school teachers
all know that if you show an

eight-year-old "*x*+3=7" and ask "what's *x*?" you're likely to get a
blank stare, but if you show the same kid " ââââ+3=7" and ask "what
number goes in the square?" you're very likely to hear "four." Snap*!*
uses that knowledge in the design of the notation for functions. When
you call a gray-ringed function with an input, call looks for an empty
input slot inside the ring, and that's where the input value is
inserted. This notation makes simple function calling obvious, in the
Scratch spirit of trying to use the visual representation to make ideas
obvious. (For non-simple cases, you can also use explicit formal
parameters.)

**Hyperblocks: First Class Vectors and Matrices**

![](images/media/image40.png){width="3.42in" height="1.23in"}But there's
a simpler way to do arithmetic on lists of numbers:

![](images/media/image41.png){width="4.37in" height="1.24in"}Most of the
blocks that normally expect single numbers or strings (*scalars*) as
inputs have been extended to understand lists as inputs too, applying
the underlying scalar operation to each item of the list. If more than
one input is a list, the lists are traversed in parallel:

A list of numbers is a *vector;* a list of vectors is a *matrix.* We
took these ideas from the language APL.

**Media Computation: First Class Costumes and Sounds**

First class vectors and matrices enable fast media computation. So, for
example, here's our mascot Alonzo: ![A picture containing clipart
Description automatically
generated](images/media/image42.png){width="0.32in" height="0.42in"} And
here's what he looks like if we remove the green component from all his
pixels:

![](images/media/image43.png){width="6.5in"
height="0.5583333333333333in"}

(Each pixel is an RGBA vector; pixels of costume reports a matrix 4 wide
by a bazillion tall.) You can draw costumes programmatically; write a
program like

![Graphical user interface, text, application, chat or text message
Description automatically
generated](images/media/image44.png){width="1.55in" height="1.04in"}![A
picture containing wire, outdoor object Description automatically
generated](images/media/image45.png){width="1.3in"
height="1.0798611111111112in"}

and then you can get the drawing as a costume:

![Graphical user interface, text, application, chat or text message
Description automatically
generated](images/media/image46.png){width="2.4166666666666665in"
height="0.8611111111111112in"}

(The thumbnail in the speech balloon is reduced in size and precision,
but the actual costume is exact.)

![](images/media/image47.png){width="2.3444444444444446in"
height="1.5083333333333333in"}

**First Class Sprites with Inheritance**

Object oriented programming is a style based around the abstraction
*object:* a collection of data and methods (procedures, which in Snap*!*
are just more data) that you interact with by sending it a *message*
(just a name, maybe in the form of a text string, and perhaps additional
inputs). The object responds to the message by carrying out a method,
which may or may not report a value back to the asker. Some people
emphasize the *data hiding* aspect of OOP (because each object has local
variables that other objects can access only by sending request messages
to the owning object) while others emphasize the *simulation* aspect (in
which each object abstractly represents something in the world, and the
interactions of objects in the program model real interactions of real
people or things). Data hiding is important for large multi-programmer
industrial projects, but for Snap*!* users it's the simulation aspect
that's important. The Snap*!* approach is therefore less restrictive
than that of some other OOP languages; we give objects easy access to
each others' data and methods.

Scratch provides a very natural set of objects, namely, sprites. Object
oriented programming rests on three legs; here's how they apply to
sprites:

-   **Persistent local state.** An object must be able to remember its
    history from one action to the next, in variables whose names are
    private to that object. Scratch sprites have this, in the form of
    "for this sprite only" variables.

-   **Message passing.** One object has to be able to ask another object
    to do something, by sending it a message. Scratch doesn't exactly
    have this capability, but a sprite can broadcast a message to *all*
    sprites. Snap*!* adds true message passing, in which messages can be
    sent to individual sprites. They can take the form of blocks or
    scripts, which are carried out using the local blocks and variables
    of the receiver.

-   ![](images/media/image48.png){width="1.475in"
    height="0.23125in"}**Inheritance.** It's very common for two or more
    objects to share some methods (local procedures). Object oriented
    programming would be hopelessly complicated if the methods had to be
    duplicated by hand in each object. So object oriented languages
    provide a way for one object to *inherit* methods and data from
    another. Starting in Scratch 2.0, there is a restricted form of
    inheritance: It's possible to "clone" a sprite; the resulting sprite
    is a *copy* of the original, and is temporary; when the program
    stops running, the temporary clones are deleted. Temporary clones
    are good for things like the bricks in a Breakout game; they all
    have the same behavior, just different positions, and can be
    recreated at the start of each new game. But sometimes a project
    needs *permanent* clones; one example would be the four ghosts in a
    Pacman game, each of which has a slightly different behavior
    (methods). Snap*!* provides both kinds of cloning: Clones created in
    a program, using the

> ![](images/media/image49.png){width="1.3625in" height="0.175in"}block
> or, since sprites are first class data in Snap*!*, the new reporter,
> are by default temporary. Clones created from the user interface,
> e.g., by right-clicking on a sprite icon in the sprite corral and
> choosing the "clone" option from the context menu, are by default
> permanent; they appear in the sprite corral, are independently
> editable, and are saved with the project.

A Snap*!* clone is *not* a *copy* of its parent; it actually shares the
attributes of the parent. So, for example, if a costume of the parent is
deleted, it's gone in the child also. More importantly, changes to a
parent's methods are immediately seen in the behavior of the children.
However, if something is changed *in the child,* then the connection of
that attribute with the parent is broken, and the child has a separate
one of whatever it is. If the child imports a new costume, its entire
wardrobe (the list of all its costumes) is copied from the parent, then
the new costume is added, and thereafter the two sprites are independent
with respect to costumes.

![](images/media/image50.png){width="2.0069444444444446in"
height="0.7569444444444444in"}![](images/media/image51.png){width="1.4097222222222223in"
height="0.7222222222222222in"}It could be confusing that a child shares
some attributes of its parent but not others. To help avoid this
confusion, inherited attributes represented by palette blocks are
*ghosted* in the child's palette and in variable watchers:

![](images/media/image52.png){width="2.111111111111111in"
height="0.5in"}![](images/media/image53.png){width="0.8125in"
height="0.4097222222222222in"}![](images/media/image54.png){width="1.4444444444444444in"
height="1.0833333333333333in"}

This is another example of extending, to more advanced computer science
ideas, the Scratch goal of using subtle visual prompts to help explain
an idea.

*Prototyping vs. Class/Instance OOP*

Readers who have programmed in class/instance languages may feel that
what's described here isn't OOP. But classes aren't necessary, and are
actually harmful in a dynamic, interpreted language that encourages
tinkering. Class/instance programmers typically design their entire
class hierarchy before actually writing code. That's an appropriate
discipline for a large group of programmers working on the same program,
but not for one kid designing a project on the fly. What the kid wants
to do is build, for example, a dog sprite, and program it with behaviors
similar to those of his or her pet Cocker Spaniel. *Then* the kid
decides to add a Rottweiler to the project. It should inherit most of
the behaviors of the Cocker Spaniel, but with a few differences. This
OOP structure is called *prototyping* or *prototype-based OOP.*

![](images/media/image55.png){width="0.5in"
height="0.25833333333333336in"}If you really want classes, make a
sprite, give it children, then the parent. The parent is then
effectively a class.

Another way in which this OOP design is nontraditional is that it uses
blocks (procedures) as messages, and *any* block can be used, not just
the ones that the receiver has declared as public methods. As explained
earlier, in the Snap*!* design, data hiding is less important than
simulation, the use of objects as metaphors for some real system of
agents.

**First Class Continuations**

Prior to joining the Snap*!* project, I had spent 20 years teaching
computer science using the best computer science book ever written,
[*Structure and Interpretation of Computer
Programs*](http://mitpress.mit.edu/sites/default/files/sicp/full-text/book/book.html)
(*SICP*). That course uses the Scheme programming language, although
it's not *about* Scheme, because that's the language that provides the
greatest versatility in supporting different programming styles with the
least amount of syntax to get in the way. Scheme has been the model for
BYOB/Snap*!* language design since BYOB 3.0. Another of our slogans is
["Snap***!*** is Scheme disguised as
Scratch."](https://youtube.com/watch?v=wtUMvx9mvm4)

BYOB 3.0 was perhaps 90% of a Scheme implementation, enough to teach a
*SICP*-based course, but missing two main capabilities. One, macros, has
been *half*-implemented since BYOB 3.0, namely the ability for a custom
block to have unevaluated inputs. (The other half, the ability to inject
code into the caller of the block, is still to come.) The second big
advanced capability is first class continuations.

The *continuation* of a block in a script is the part of the computation
that remains to be done when that block has been run. For a command
block, this generally means the blocks below it in the script (plus
whatever remains of the script that called this block, and so on). For a
reporter, it means the block to which this block provides an input, plus
whatever comes below it.

![](images/media/image56.png){width="4.79375in"
height="1.167361111111111in"}Continuations themselves are not a special
feature of Scheme. Any part of a computation, in *any* language, has a
continuation---whatever is left to do after it finishes. But in most
languages, the programmer isn't encouraged to think of the continuation
as a *thing,* although the implementor of the programming language does
think about continuations. What's special in Scheme is that it treats
continuations as first class data. Giving the programmer access to
continuations allows users to write any control structure; the most
common examples are nonlocal exit (catch and throw in the Snap*!* tools
library) and a thread scheduler.

**\
**

**Metaprogramming: Scripts as Data**

![](images/media/image59.png){width="2.7597222222222224in"
height="2.459722222222222in"}![](images/media/image60.png){width="3.59in"
height="0.98in"}![](images/media/image61.png){width="1.45in"
height="1.3in"}![](images/media/image62.png){width="6.509877515310587in"
height="1.19in"}![](images/media/image63.png){width="6.497736220472441in"
height="2.79in"}![](images/media/image64.png){width="3.4in"
height="0.97in"}A few pictures, worth 1000 words each, about how we can
write programs to manipulate programs: **\
**

**Linked lists**

The data structure that Scratch (and therefore Snap*!*) calls a "list"
is actually implemented as a *dynamic array,* i.e., a contiguous block
of memory that is expanded by copying as needed. A *linked list* is a
different data structure made out of *pairs;* each pair contains one
list item plus a pointer to another pair, so the entire list contains as
many pairs as items, and they don't have to be contiguous in memory.

![](images/media/image65.png){width="0.8in"
height="0.18333333333333332in"}For example, given a list of numbers ,
the goal is to make a list in which every item is two

times the corresponding item of the input.

![](images/media/image66.png){width="6.070833333333334in"
height="1.4777777777777779in"}![](images/media/image68.png){width="2.3958333333333335in"
height="0.2986111111111111in"}

In the iterative version, the add command block extends the same list by
one item each time it's invoked. This kind of list access is fastest
with dynamic arrays.

In the recursive version, the in front of block creates a new pair,
whose left half is a new item, and whose right half is (a pointer to)
the result of the recursive call, namely a sublist of the result. This
is fastest with linked lists.

It is a goal of Snap*!* that users not have to know anything about data
structures, but should still have their project run as fast as possible.
Therefore, Snap*!* automatically creates linked lists when the reporters
(item, all but first of, in front of) are used, but creates dynamic
arrays when the commands (add, insert, replace, delete) are used.

**JavaScript in custom blocks**

![](images/media/image69.png){width="2.65in" height="0.225in"}Do you
*still* think you know everything Snap*!* has to teach? In that case,
you'll like the

![](images/media/image70.png){width="4.4375in"
height="1.7638888888888888in"}block. In the following example, never
mind right now what it actually does; instead, notice how inputs are
passed from the Snap*!* environment to the JavaScript world.

This example comes from a text-to-speech library. Many Snap*!* libraries
have been written by advanced users; writing libraries is a way you can
explore JavaScript programming while remaining in, and contributing to,
the Snap*!* community.
